hey what's up this is may 8th 2016 this
is the voice of a guy his first name is
ISIL his last name is Mazar you probably
know me from my youtube channel which is
called a ballast yell this is my first
attempt to invite and answer questions
from my supporters on patreon and I
really do appreciate the support I've
received from everybody I'm gonna start
by answering a question that nobody
asked which indeed concerns the money
and it's a way of thanking you guys for
your support already at this stage I
think as of today I've only been asking
for donations on patreon for 6 or 7 days
and as you guys know I've encouraged
people to give the minimum not the
maximum which i think is a much more
positive thing in the long term I mean
I'd much rather have you know a large
number of people with each person just
paying $1.00 then I would have a small
number of people paying large amounts of
money but where that support is
inconsistent or difficult to justify or
where I can't really provide value from
my end where it's a struggle for me to
be producing enough content enough
quality content to reward someone who's
donating $100 or what-have-you but I
really do appreciate it and look as of
today I believe the total the total
amount I'm receiving in donations per
month is now over two hundred US dollars
two hundred dollars per month and if you
guys watch my channel you know I am poor
enough that this is not an insignificant
amount of money to me when I'm in China
I'll be earning eight hundred and fifty
US dollars per month I think that's the
current exchange rate in the Chinese
currency five thousand five hundred yuan
I think it's about eight hundred fifty
US dollars off the top of my head so yes
two hundred US dollars is a significant
amount of money although you guys
already know the story my reasons for
doing this at this time are not fund
raising but I think one interesting
question that nobody asked and I'm gonna
answer anyway is of whether or not in
future I might really turn my attention
towards fundraising proper of trying to
raise the most money I can either for a
project or foundation now that is a
temptation for me and I think that's a
real career path that's open to me I do
have a fairly deep background in the
nonprofit sector both in terms of my
study of charities and what I've learned
from participating in them myself really
you know there's a third category this
is gonna sound a bit strange but that
some of you will know the truth of it I
learned a lot about humanitarian work
from doing it and from studying it but
you know what I probably learned the
most from the third category of
conversations in cafes you know informal
talk with people who had years and years
of experience in that sector and I had a
lot of conversations of that kind over
many years as much as I learned from
books a lot some of those conversations
face-to-face were even more valuable
probably you know if I hadn't done the
book reading I wouldn't have known the
right questions to ask I wouldn't have
known how to appreciate what I was being
told but you learn a lot off-the-record
informally by interviewing people so
anyway I do have that that kind of
background and it comes up every so
often in my life you know so in the past
I worked in museums I did NGO related
work NGO related research and Southeast
Asia so charity work whatever you want
to say I also have a long history of
involvement with Buddhism Theravada
Buddhism which included the critique of
what they do and don't do in the charity
sector just a couple of months ago a
friend of mine in Hong Kong was
complaining on the internet about the
failure of Buddhist charities to address
some current crises in the world and I
wrote to him right away with a real plan
of action saying look if you want to set
up your own foundation here's how we do
it step one two three four and I was
able to speak in real detail to really
present a plan of action that we could
we could start on tomorrow and we're
within five years we could really have a
serious foundation that would employ the
two of us it wouldn't employ ten people
or 50 people but it would at least
employ the two of us in doing real work
that makes a difference in the world and
I said look here's how we set it up
legally here's how we do the fundraising
you know if you want to get serious
let's
talk so that friend of mine if he's
hearing this he knows who he is I've
only got one friend at Hong Kong so he's
I think I think it's fair to say he is
the only friend I still have from my
years of involvement with Buddhism which
is very sad and reflects badly on that
whole scene I still have a couple
friends who are involved with the the
Hindu side of scholarship in academia
but none of the buddists have have
stayed in touch with me um and I wish I
wish they would I have actually had by
the way have had some fan mail from
people who started following my web
presence because of Buddhism and who
became vegan only because of my constant
internet so they discovered my work
because of Buddhism and then listened to
what I had to say about veganism and
made the change that's it's a nice
positive thing that's spun out of that
but my point is here in in my intro to
this Q&A session is that yes in the
future it really is possible I will
devote my energies to setting up and
operating a charity or a non-profit
foundation and of course veganism would
be a large component of that how exactly
you define that foundation what exactly
it does whether it's focused on Asia or
you know one particular country in Asia
or Canada or what have you
those are difficult questions but in
many ways the type of crises in my life
make it more likely that I'm gonna do
that kind of work you know the fact like
versa if I had a successful career as an
architect I couldn't do that if I had
decided to become a lawyer in Taiwan I
couldn't do that and I would be spending
years and years getting a law degree and
so on and then trying to earn enough
money to justify against the years spent
getting a law degree the very peculiar
paths have been forced onto in life
makes it much more likely that I will
set up and run a charity at some point
and apart from that's that's talking
about a permanent charity a permanent
foundation to say still is likely in the
future but before then obviously I might
also do fundraising for
specific project so you know as vegans a
specific project can be can be helping
one elephant can be helping one monkey
it could be something very very specific
like that but I can imagine doing you
know fundraising for a specific event
for a specific action in the future but
that's not what we're doing right now
hopefully what we're doing here on
patreon is really creating a wonderful
crossroads for you guys to meet and
interact with one another for you guys
to stay in touch with me and I hope it
can inspire a lot of positive activity
and also of course I hope it's
entertaining and interesting for you
guys to hear the sound of my voice right
now and and what-have-you and you know
for $1 a month I hope that you guys do
feel it's it's worth your time and it's
worth your money it's very easy for me
to put myself in your shoes I know the
type of content I would be looking out
for on the Internet myself and you know
it's it's hard to see how this could go
wrong let's put it that way all right I
got a um so I guess this is question one
there's a comment you guys might have
missed from aleena so I have a user
who's using the name of Lena who writes
that she lives in a non democratic state
the UAE the United Arab Emirates and she
reflects on the lessons she's drawn from
my recent videos including my long
interview with an 18 year old new vegan
activist you guys may or may not have
seen the full the full recording for
that is about an hour and 15 minutes
long with a young woman who just became
vegan a few months ago and wanted to
talk to me about effective activism for
veganism in Canada but in with this this
patron Alina Alina is writing about her
own experience in the United Arab
Emirates which is not a democracy and
that she has to think very carefully
about the type of activism to engage in
because any kind of street protest or
aggressive approach will actually put
people in prison so this is rewarding
for me again I've actually I've had some
fan mail recently from North Africa
from Muslim states in northern Africa I
do you know I have some Muslim viewers
living in Muslim majority countries and
although you know my channel doesn't
cater to them I think it's indicative of
my you know pragmatic down-to-earth real
world approach that the lessons I'm
talking about learning from politics
they feel are applicable to their
situations you know obviously I think
you can't say that for durianrider and
you can't say that for a group like
direct action everywhere I think what
they're saying you know if you were
watching in North Africa or the the
Emirates or what-have-you
you'd have to say this is insane this
can't possibly work here now I wrote a
medium length reply to Alina you know
what you guys can see on patreon if you
click around and find it in broad
brushstrokes what I think is interesting
here in this interaction is that
fundamentally the issues I'm discussing
with Alina are the same as what I've
been trying to alert people to in the
Western world because they're asking the
question of how can we be effective as
activists as vegans in pursuit of social
change how can we be effective given the
cultural considerations that surround us
given the political context that
surrounds us you know in a fairly deep
sense so I make some suggestions here I
know I did study the politics of the
Muslim world when I was in university I
do I mean you know I have some knowledge
on paper about the politics that part of
the world and it does it continues to
enrich my life my studies in that area
but I have never lived in a Muslim
majority country it's not my my personal
area of interest or expertise
nevertheless I have mentioned that a few
times in my youtube channel I do take
politics in that part of the world
seriously and really having a deep sense
of comparative political analysis is an
important part of what I do when I look
at political problems in Cambodia I can
appreciate that as bad as they may be
they're still very different from
political problems in Indonesia right
next door and many many people again I
mostly deal with left-wing people but
left-wing people often show up and want
to intervene in these situations and
they're not even going through the step
of an analysis that says well this is
bad but is it as bad as what's happening
in the country next door how can we
understand this in a kind of comparative
context and you know obviously it
doesn't I'm not saying that all
interventions are wrong or misguided but
it's very easy to become hysterical
about a political situation and in the
strictest sense you lose a sense of
perspective if you don't evaluate a
situation in its context that way
including comparative evaluation so the
suggestions are made here for a Muslim
cultural context you know I point out
the significance of institution building
and charity building
it's obviously relates to what I was
just talking about my own life
possibility of making foundation and
pointing out that in a in a non
democratic muslim-majority context you
do still have the freedom to to own and
operate a restaurant most Muslim
countries do you know if you're in a
Muslim country that tolerates a Chinese
restaurant and that allows a Chinese
restaurant to have Buddhist imagery
inside the Chinese restaurant not all
Muslim states do and some that's illegal
like to have a statue of the Buddha
inside a Chinese restaurant but if you
have that much freedom then you actually
already have the real possibility of a
form of very effective activism in
building restaurants and the Muslim
countries to generalize they tend to
have a very positive view of certain
types of charity zakat zakat style
charity so you know you could have a
vegan foundation that is giving alms to
the poor that is feeding poor people or
that's engaged in other traditionally
acceptable forms of Muslim charity but
where that charity is vegan
we're implicitly or educationally you're
not just feeding the poor you're maybe
also trying to teach the poor how to
feed themselves and you're making a
point about your charity not killing
animals or what-have-you in passing if
you can package that in a way that's
politically acceptable and that
resonates culture
that's meaningful in a Muslim cultural
context that's going to be much more
powerful than just expressing your
outrage or or street protests and again
it's it's even more of a problem because
if the street protests put you in prison
you're not accomplishing anything by
going to prison and there there are a
few other examples there in that reply
where I asked the question of what what
kind of charity might be effective there
certainly would be the possibility
within a Muslim state to address things
like heart attacks and cancer to have a
health based approach where you know
you're educating people on how to cope
with these things and again it's easy
for me to imagine how you can package
that in a in an acceptable form for
Muslim society you know if you're also
against alcohol and against cigarettes
you know you could present that in a way
where veganism is one component of it
but we are not directly challenging the
the political status quo
but as I said at the start of this in
broad brushstrokes what I'm discussing
here with with Astrid I'm sorry I've
read the wrong name what I'm discussing
here with Elena it really is the same
set of questions that have been
challenging my viewers with for many
many months months ago I had videos
addressing the group direct action
everywhere in a decadent Western
democratic setting where I'm really
asking a question is outrage effective
as the core of activism is that the way
we really would want to broach these
issues is that really the way to speak
to either a broad audience of the public
or any specific segment what really the
outcomes again questioning cultural
context legal and political context
questioning what are the better
alternatives and a democratic society to
have meaningful outcomes but also I'm
questioning who are you you as an
individual if you are an architect you
probably have a better option than
running into a restaurant and screaming
at people or running into a butcher shop
and screaming at people and direct
action every
where their core method during the last
several years has been running into
those places and screaming it's not food
it's violence etc other slogans and
really including screaming and weeping
in a very emotional way very incoherent
emotional form and you can see they have
their own videos that demonstrate this
where they show their leaders weeping
and screaming at strangers and so on now
okay that's already know I where I stand
on that but already in the Western
contra context questioning the politics
of outrage questioning outrage as an
effective mode of pursuing social change
and saying but who are you if you are an
architect you have something better to
do with your time you have other talents
you probably for one thing don't have
that much time to waste but you have
other avenues to pursue social change in
a Western democracy or even in the in
the United Arab Emirates frankly
architects are not necessarily brilliant
you can meet some architects who are
complete idiots I have I've met some
architects who are not very bright but
I'll tell you one thing if you're an
architect you know how to draw you have
drafting skills you almost certainly
have access to an office that can print
large full-color posters architects both
use you know plotter printers to do
graphic design but you know a part of
architecture isn't just the you know the
actual planning of the building you
often have to present to clients
visualizations this is what it will look
like when it's complete so you know
glossy full-color illustrations are an
important part of what architecture
firms do these days as you might guess I
do have some experience of this in my
own professional work right away just
within an architect's own office what he
could do to positively impact veganism
you call channel writes I can think of a
lot of things even if the guy is not
particularly bright just given the
artistic aspects of architecture
now hopefully even if someone's an
architect we also assume they're they're
literate they're definitely at a higher
level of literacy than someone like
Duran
probably they can put together
information or do original research
probably they can be involved in some
form of legal advocacy of lobbying
government probably there's a lot more
they can do and as you've all served you
say on my youtube channel this does not
mean that I I think there's no role
whatsoever for street protests I think
we have to think about street protests
as a rally as a way of rewarding people
who already are vegan and even then it's
probably not the best way but really you
know we have to be a piece of the fact
that vegans want all the same things
normal people wanted a life boyfriends
want to find girlfriends girlfriends
want to find boyfriends people want to
meet each other and be sociable and they
want to break the isolation of being
vegan and deal with the you know for the
agony and the struggle of it all
and there is a real role for the you
know the social elements of protest but
at the same time of course I'm warning
against I'm warning against this
becoming an end in itself and definitely
for many many many vegans of many
different political stripes this has
been distorted as if Street protests is
the only method of pursuing political
change and there's no respectable way to
come to that conclusion in terms of
learning the lessons from history and
when you talk to someone like Elena here
in the United Arab Emirates or you're
looking at China or Cambodia or any
other place that has shall we say
limited democracy many of those issues
are again put into a very interesting
contrast because suddenly the stakes are
higher going to jail is no joke and it's
really worth wondering are you making a
positive change on the steps that lead
to your going to jail okay next question
Astrid writes in astrid says apologies
if i missed a video of yours you've
talked about the benefits of being in a
democracy when it comes to trying to
make change and obviously the benefits
living in a democratic and country
compared to the dictatorships of the
world but what are your personal views
on the morality of democracy her
question goes on to reflect a little bit
further so that's the end of question
Astrid the core of her question is what
are your personal views on the morality
of democracy
well my engagement with these issues is
is fairly deep
I do think first and foremost of ancient
writers like Thucydides Aristotle etc
the ancient Greek discourse on democracy
that is not idealistic if you actually
read through Citadis he is a very harsh
critic of democracy including the
tendency of democracy to start Wars
another famous voice in that discourse
who does not mean anything to me
personally I don't feel connection you
know John Stuart Mill is another great
critic of democracy where he does
illustrate the value of democracy but
you know John Stuart Mill was was
actually very concerned about the
oppression of minorities you know when
you have majority rule one of the
negative aspects of that is the the
bullying of and the suppression of and
you know minority peoples within that
country now that's interesting because
of course John Stuart Mill's own
experience was primarily in England and
secondarily with India he actually
devoted a lot of his time to advocating
for human rights in India we would say
I'm simplifying just say human rights in
India obviously two completely different
contexts you know the British Empire of
recent centuries as opposed to to
ancient Greece but I mean I just say I
say this in preamble my personal views
on the morality of democracy do not
hinge on you know specific anecdotal
problems that just happen to come up in
the newspaper this month they do stretch
back over thousands of years and are
based on drawing lessons from from
somewhat terrible chapters of the
history of the world
I very honest with
myself about the the immoral aspects of
democracy democracy has a funny tendency
of starting Wars democracy has a
terrible tendency to be unstable to be
fleeting and I think what most people
ignore today in 2016
democracy also can fail and the failure
is not always dramatic it's not always
like Cambodia collapsing into sort of
genocide today in 2016 I think it's
quite fair to say that Mexico is a
failure of democracy when you read about
a town in Mexico where the mayor is
assassinated and then they try to elect
another mayor and that an error is also
assassinated because local you know drug
cartels local drug dealing gangs control
that town and where there are no police
and no law you know there are Mexico is
not a dramatic failure of democracy it
hasn't collapsed into genocide or civil
war but nevertheless Mexico I would say
is a failed democracy and obviously
there's there's a large literature
written by specialists about that and
Mexico is really a very important
example to consider for one thing it's
literally next door to the United States
you know it's not Muslim it's Catholic
it doesn't have problems with mass
illiteracy or many of the other excuses
the fillers democracy in many many ways
Mexico has benefited from neoliberalism
in recent decades economically Mexico
has been through a period of rapid
improvement not a period of of collapse
or declining standards of living or
what-have-you but nevertheless it's a
failure so that's that's really a very
grave warning about the fragility of
democracy and I think it's fair to say
everyone just wants to ignore it and
nobody is comfortable really paying
attention to and learning from the
failure of democracy in Mexico it might
be an exaggeration to say the same about
recent failings of democracy in Greece
or what have you
to give one example in terms of what I
regard as immoral in democracy
so the question uses some some
interesting phrasing here says you know
you reflect that democracy is in some
ways fundamentally based on and
perpetuated by some evils that is true
so it's give you an example I I do
believe that discrimination against
people based on their ability to pay is
evil in the following sense you have a
university a certain number of people
get to study architecture staying with
the same example and other people are
gonna get kicked out or refused I think
it is completely immoral to choose who
will become an architect based on their
ability to pay so that is a separate
question from whether or not the
university costs money might you know if
the tuition is five thousand dollars if
it costs five thousand dollars that's
one thing but are you admitted or not
admitted do you have the opportunity
based on your ability to pay based on
the money you already have it's quite
possible to have a situation where poor
people are admitted and their payment is
is deferred that it's delayed let's say
okay well ten years from now
you got to pay back the tuition here
there are many many ways to cope with
tuition fees in different different
countries around the world but my point
is that that that is a fundamental form
of discrimination that I believe is
immoral and the democratic society I
live in is completely skewed by that
bias now again within Canada Canada has
some elements of socialism they're
pretty crappy I nobody looks at Canada
as a great positive example of a
successful country neither in terms of
democracy nor in terms of social
services but many many people including
Americans exaggerate the the supposed
socialism of our health care system I
would say again regardless of the price
it is deeply immoral from my perspective
for
access to medical care to be based on
your ability to pay so you have two
people who both need a cancer operation
who gets the operation if it's only the
person who can pay for it or if it goes
first to the person who can pay for it
and the second person has to wait longer
maybe die of cancer because their their
operation is delayed that to me is
fundamentally immoral now ironically
within Canada we have a different a
different social system in each province
each province has its own healthcare
system and its own laws governing these
things but sometimes the provinces that
have the best medical system have the
most immoral medical system by this
criterion so the province of Quebec it
may have the best quality of hospitals
the best quality of medical care in
Canada but they they absolutely have a a
two-track system or two-tier system this
way where you know the system has
basically been corrupted by cash
services they have both a socialist
system and they have a fee-for-service
system
competing with each other within the
province in a very strange legal gray
area that the government tends to
flip-flop on and people tend to be in
denial about so to me again you know I
live in a society where these questions
never get asked and never get answered
it is totally immoral to operate a
prison on a for-profit basis in my
opinion I do not see how any democracy
can justify that I do it like I'll just
mention I do believe prisons should
exist there are people who
idealistically claim that all prisons
should be abolished there should be no
prisons in the world I don't I don't
believe that however the concept of
running a prison as a business on a
for-profit basis is to me fundamentally
and intrinsically immoral and now within
that tell you about the prisons and
correction service the idea that someone
will get better treatment based on their
ability to Patti so to me that's a deep
evil that's completely one completely
unacceptable I don't think you should
have a better lawyer a better trial a
better outcome
that you should go to a better prison
because you're wealthy to me this is
completely undemocratic completely
immoral and yet the majority of
democracy in the world accept these
things without any any hesitation so now
my final point under this heading why is
it that access to the political system
itself is based on the ability to pay to
me this is completely immoral completely
unforgivable why is it that I can't talk
to the mayor or I can't talk to my
member of Parliament's in the United
States you can't talk to your
Congressman why is it that my ability to
have a voice in government is actually
based on my ability to pay why is it
that my access to the law itself
requires thousands and thousands of
dollars to go to a lawyer I this is it's
a problem so obvious that nobody wants
to address it both getting a lawyer and
getting time in court and in getting
your voice heard again this isn't just
Canada United States this is also true
of France England what have you your
ability to contest these things is based
on your ability to pay so to me I mean
obviously anyone can think of a better
way to organize both of these issues but
this has this has become an unquestioned
assumption about how Western democracy
operates and really it has nothing to do
with capitalism and has nothing to do
with socialism as nothing anything else
it's a fundamental core question of
democracy you know right now my ability
even to to have of my divorce relies on
my paying thousands and thousands of
dollars to a lawyer
my divorce admittedly is a private
matter but if I want to challenge the
fact that a factory is polluting a river
if I know that if I can prove that in a
court of law why is it impossible for me
to have a voice the factory owner has a
voice because he has money so he has
access to Parliament he has access to
lawyers what about me why is it that I
have to do fundraising and get donations
do very hard to do to raise thousands of
dollars to give to a lawyer so that I
can challenge that so I can debate that
that will
unthinkable to Aristotle to you know to
Siddha teas and the theoreticians of
ancient Athens
even though Athens had its own
contradictions obviously the
slave-owning society and extremely
unequal their assumption that you could
just show up and talk to the government
was very deep their idea of what a trial
was their idea of what an election was
was profoundly different if you actually
read Aristotle's constitution of Athens
you will find a very interesting
critique of voting itself
Aristotle did not believe in electing
people through voting very very
interesting but I leave that aside so
Astrid there are some thoughts in
response to your thoughtful question
sorry so that was question from Astrid
my next question is from Alexa Alexa
Arats she asks hip-hop recommendations /
playlist so this is good I'm trying to
trying to like the tone slightly I guess
you know I would say in general if
you're downloading hip off from the
internet
Raekwon is somewhat underweight rated
Raekwon is one of the members of the the
wu-tang clan and although he's
associated with his early period his
early period was when he was on the
radio was more popular he really
continued to consistently put out
mixtapes for free so apart from his
albums a very long list if you go to
Wikipedia get discography for Raekwon
you you can get a pretty impressive list
of free legally free to download mix
tapes that Raekwon continued to produce
throughout his whole career I don't know
I could say more about hip hop lately
I've been listening a lot to an obscure
mixtape from Ghostface called put it on
the line that's a little bit older as
those two examples already mentioned a
lot of my own engaged with hip hop is
shaped around
whoo Tang Clan that era and that
sub-genre of rap music
not not sure how much I should say in
terms of the younger generation you know
little B all of his music is free you do
have to do a lot of it is garbage but
you know given that it's free anyway if
you want a little B mixtape that's maybe
a good representation of his work he has
one called God's father the gods father
mixtape again you can download that for
free
there are at least four or five good
tracks on that many of them are bad but
you delete them this is really the era
of free music in general as my life
progressed you know around the time when
I was a university students myself let's
say around around 1999 the only music I
listened to was on the one hand hip hop
and the other hand Johann Sebastian Bach
like a certain type of classical music
that was very mathematical and
structured and then when I heard all the
songs I liked by Bach a thousand times I
stopped listening to classical music and
it was just
rap music it was just hip-hop so now rap
music is really the only the only music
I listen to I assumed that I would stop
listening to rap music when my daughter
was born and I was really working and
living as a full-time father however as
you guys know I now see my daughter so
rarely that I do listen to rap music
when my daughter is not around and she's
not around most of the time it's there
anyway I guess feel free to ask more
questions if you want to know and maybe
this is boring for the rest of my
listeners so I'm gonna move on okay
Genevieve Gabrielle she asks aisel do
you think it is important for vegans to
stay on social media like Facebook does
it make a difference
I think it does but maybe I am deleting
myself
close quote okay
you know I like to keep it real you know
not being on social media is a luxury I
wish my life was so meaningful and
so busy that I had no reason to use
social media I wish I knew so many vegan
activists that I had no reason to
contribute to YouTube or to talk to you
people on paper that would be wonderful
can you imagine if I was living in a
situation where I was getting so much
done in terms of real world activism
that there was just no point in engaging
in social media or internet activism I
can imagine that likely to happen so I
mean just say I do not regard social
media as a luxury I regard not being on
social medias a luxury if you can
exclude it from your life if you can
avoid it or you can minimize it then
probably there are a lot of other things
going well in your life and then that
that's a luxury you can afford in a
recent video I reflected on on YouTube
that if I had taken all of this time
that I put into YouTube and instead put
it into meeting up with the same vegans
here in Victoria several of whom really
disliked me and not all of them but you
know several of them do it would have
accomplished nothing it would have been
a complete waste of my time I think I
went to just enough events here to to
recognize that it was wasting my time
and I've actually just recently gotten
some fan mail from other vegans here in
Victoria who who never met me um and
they also were writing to me saying you
know they really appreciate my YouTube
channel and that they also are a bit
shocked at what's going on in the local
vegan scene here but you know I mean for
myself back when I was living a much
more meaningful life in some ways when I
was really engaged with what was going
on around me and Laos I wasn't on social
media at all and I was very very careful
with my web presence and with what
articles I put online I did publish some
articles in the internet because the the
politics was in the real world and in my
face and what-have-you and it would be
very it would be wonderful to imagine
that one day in the future I would be so
busy with you know making a meaningful
difference directly in the real world
that I would be contributing less and
less to the Internet
that that would be very positive but
it's unlikely so in my own life now you
guys know what's up with me I think I
might be putting more time into YouTube
more time into the internet because the
rest of my life is going to be pretty
meaningless being bogged down with
schoolwork both as a student doesn't end
as a teacher in China and I'll be very
isolated from and alienated from anyone
with really common interests common
passions myself and I think that's true
for the majority of vegans right now in
2016 the most common thing I hear from
vegans in the Internet is that they do
not know any other vegans in real life
so that's why they're on the Internet
but if they if they were I mean again we
all use this word community when there
really is no community for vegans not
online and not anywhere in the real
world so far as I can see with possible
exceptions like Taiwan if you want to
talk about Buddhists vegans in Taiwan
etc I think for any of us if we had a
real community that would be the point
at which you could stop wasting time on
social media and okay I'm gonna I'm
keepin it all the way real some of the
time I spent on social media I regret
and it hurts me emotionally and it feels
like a waste but like I feel epically I
have to do it anyway I just spent some
time yesterday sending some messages to
complete strangers on the internet who
were vegan you know writing them because
they were vegan saying hi I'm on my way
to Thailand you know do you want to meet
up because I'm passing through Thailand
on my way from Canada to China at this
stage mile it feels bad and I've done
that for so many years and it brings
back the memory of so many efforts to
make friends or just introduce myself to
make connections with other people
because they're vegan to build on common
ground and where it ends badly or it
starts badly or just you never get any
reply yeah you know putting yourself out
there making yourself available
emotionally to try to connect with
strangers to try to have those those
mean
could a social media sometimes it does
hurt me and it does feel exhausting and
it does feel like a waste of time and I
think a lot of people end up embittered
and stop doing that and even stop
replying when other people write to them
when it's someone else trying to
initiate and trying to make that
connection I think the truth is as a
character I am NOT embittered by the
experiences of that I've had horrible
terrible experiences I have not let them
and bitter me and there's both good and
bad to that the negative aspect is that
I'm still really suffering you know I'm
still really feeling this stuff as it
happens if you're embittered if you're
jaded if you're closed off from those
feelings and emotions then by the same
token you're not suffering in the same
way I still am really trying to make new
connections you know like a teenager
let's say like a teenager who's just
transferred to a new school that's my
situation in life you're the new kid in
the high school everyone else has
friends you don't have any friends
because you just move to this town you
know as a teenager that's my situation
again and again and now I'm moving to
China and it's gonna be that way again
both on the internet and in real life I
mean that vulnerable situation and I do
get hurt and I do suffer but that
process of Perpetual suffering is
preferable to being jaded to being
unfeeling to being closed off from new
experience so that's that's as real as
it gets
Jenny that's my that's my response to
your question she also asks what is your
favorite thing to eat in China I am
actually gonna dodge that question by
mentioning a food you guys won't have
heard about they're one of one of the
only vegan foods that's really a native
indigenous vegan food in northern
Thailand and Laos both countries
northern Thailand and Laos is called
Khao lam I'll post a link because you'll
never guess how to spell it but yo Cal
Lam is a method they have of taking
fresh cut bamboo and putting rice inside
of it and they will normally chop up
some kind of local potato
such as the Tarot or another tuber and
then the sometimes they'll add some
coconut fat some bits of coconut or
something else there are different
recipes and different regions different
perdition's they often add some other
some purple rice which is called king's
rice so that the whole thing is purple
when you eat it and they roast it on an
open fire and the the taste of the smoke
gets into it and so on and not only is
it vegan it's actually pretty close to
antiseptic in a country where most of
the food is filthy and can carry disease
this whole thing is kind of boiled from
the inside out and you you break off the
the bits of bamboo you peel back the
bamboo layer and then you get to eat the
the rice and other ingredients that are
inside rice and it's potato so that is
actually healthy it's actually safe and
the vast majority of white people do not
know that exists I can remember again in
terms of just reflecting on this I mean
I'm not a loner by nature I remember I
took a long bus trip going through
Thailand and Laos want you know one day
where the bus takes hours and hours and
hours and I made friends with like 15
people on that bus trip you know
obviously is not deep friendship but you
have several hours together talking and
so you know these guys were all talking
to me in their friends with me you know
by the end of the trip from him for they
were terrified to try Cal lamb there was
a very disconsolate young woman trying
to sell cow lamb out of a out of a
basket and I could speak Lao so I showed
it out to the window to her she was
shocked to see a white man speaking Lao
as fluently as I could back then I now
haven't really spoken these languages
for ten years but I called out the
window to her and I was speaking to her
and Lao and you know she brightened up
so much you could see she was really
hurt and depressed she's a very poor
person obviously and she was trying to
make money selling this this food Callum
to foreigners in buses you know when in
theory she could have sold some to truck
drivers but nobody was buying it because
they they didn't even know what it was
it looks like she's selling bamboo
sticks you know they don't know it
I remember trying to encourage the other
people on the bus to try this this
exotic food that is that is vegan anyway
it made her day that I spoke to her in
Lao and I bought several and gave them
to other people on the bus for free and
they were still really afraid to eat it
until I ate it in front of them and so
and then they were all delighted that
the thought it was delicious
anyway I mentioned this as another
example I mean I'm not a loner I don't
have a problem making friends everywhere
I go I am sociable and I meet people so
and you guys have some sense of my
character on YouTube I also am NOT a
nice guy
it's something else of tax again but you
know you have those kinds of experiences
again again and as I say for me my
situation still is that I'm the new kid
at the at the high school and I'm still
having to move to a new town start again
with nothing nothing but a backpack and
really having no friends in this world
so hopefully over the long term you know
my internet presence has some positive
effect in my life in that respect too it
would be great if now when going to
China there was one person in China who
knew me from from YouTube or one person
in Thailand or what have you that would
be great next question is from Mike on
Raw so if you guys have seen just
yesterday yesterday night I uploaded a
video giving a shout out to Mike on Raw
and responding to another issue from his
YouTube channel Mike asks could you
discuss what you have found are the
pieces necessary for a movement to have
success you have talked about things
that won't work on their own and you
have talked about how political
influence at all levels is important but
pain political influence create success
on its own what are the critical parts
okay
close quote end of question so obviously
this could be a one-hour monologue and
response to this given my background of
my interest in life to give a somewhat
limited reflection in just two parts one
the most successful political movements
are the most invisible so in this I
mentioned you know in a recent video
Mothers Against Drunk Driving the
campaigns
to address and indeed demonize you know
drunk driving like scientifically it's
actually possible for a person to drink
alcohol and drive a car and a completely
responsible and safe way politically
that's an inconvenient fact but we have
set up laws that make it completely
illegal for anyone to drink alcohol and
drive a car and I agree with that I mean
that's the only way you can you have to
have a law that applies to everyone
equally you can't have a law that says
well if you're really good at driving
drunk we'll let you do it
but you know over a period of decades
the Crusades against drunk driving and
the Crusades to really kind of limit the
culture of alcohol have been very very
successful and they're also largely
invisible now at the at the opposite
extreme another example I talked about
recent video was the question of the
conspiracy for who killed JFK
this type of conspiratorial movement for
political change and of course lobbies
that are paid for by industries would
have you there are many political
movements that in this sense also are
invisible why do I mention this well for
one thing the success of Mothers Against
Drunk Driving is not unique they don't
have any special advantages their
methods and their successes can be
reproduced can be imitated can be
learned from and by contrast some vegans
want to draw attention to the abolition
of slavery specifically the abolition of
slavery in Georgia in the United States
and the southern United States and many
aspects of that are unique and cannot be
reproduced
you know the liberation of slaves in
Haiti fascinating history that I was i
myself have read a great deal about but
there's no way I can say oh yeah look at
the situation for slaves in Haiti
several hundred years ago and now
obviously we can just apply these
lessons to Canada in 2016 no you have to
be able to recognize when something is
comparable when it's reproducible when
it is something you can generalize about
and when really it's it's quite unique
now I mean in Haiti the Revolution that
freed the slaves involved real violence
of the most gruesome kind
including tremendous violence by the
white people on behalf of the slave
owners but the slaves themselves you
know it was said at the time and not
without without reason the flag of the
Revolution was of a white baby impaled
on a spike because they would the slaves
would kill the slave masters and they
would routinely take a spear and you
know murder the babies murder the
infants of the slave masters and then
marched the next town with a spear with
a dead baby at the end of it now I
mentioned this only it's incredibly gory
chapter of history but let's keep it
real when other vegans talk about using
slavery the abolition of slavery as a
model for social change for veganism is
that really what you're talking about
homeboy I don't think so
I don't think at all we're really
talking about a situation where you you
want to emulate that type of violent
social change and now obviously I mean
most people who really study that
history they have mixed sympathies
because of course slavery is bad they
want to see slavery end but they
understand why the extreme violence
happened it's it's tragic but learning
from that tragedy and what lessons you
apply now especially in a democratic
society where you can go to City Hall
you can collect donations and hire a
lawyer and challenge these things in a
court of law
you know the slaves in Haiti couldn't do
that you know when there are so many
politicians open to us that's really
worth challenging and as I say so the
the real contrast I'm making is between
this idea I'm putting forward that the
most successful political movements are
the most invisible and then on the other
hand people tend to think that the
squeaky wheel gets the grease so that's
an idiom that's a sort of childhood
idiom we have in English the squeaky
wheel gets the grease the point of that
phrase is to say that complaining gets
results you know street protests
complaining being the squeaky wheel no I
don't think that gets results I think
again whether you look at Mothers
Against Drunk Driving or any other you
know again campaigns against smoking
cigarettes to reform
you know labeling and health standards
for cigarettes etc etc those are the
most successful and and they're also the
most invisible and the culture of
complaint is not really the culture you
you want to be imitating although again
as I've said earlier in this in the same
podcast I do have sympathy with the
social reasons for why people want to
organize rallies and protests and I
don't I don't regard them as completely
worthless um coming back to Mike's
question here part two the second aspect
I wanted to mention if you're really
sick asking the question what what is
the the critical aspect the critical
aspect is money okay the critical issue
is economic
why is petaa the most powerful voice for
veganism in the world today People for
the Ethical Treatment of Animals not
because they're smart not because
they're right not because they're good
at what they do because they got money
okay they pay wages they employ people
all right I hear a lot of BS about being
a full-time activist on the Internet the
employees of petaa are probably the only
full-time activists in the world that
the majority of them how many vegan
agencies can you say employ people now
you guys know if you watched my channel
I don't like peda there are a lot of
things I dislike about them I think
they're kind of dumb and they're kind of
goofy and you know they've been on the
wrong side of history on a number of
different issues not it's not perfect
most vegans of course hate them because
they kills their animals or they hate
them because they have posters of naked
women in them etc etc but guess what at
the end of the day you know money talks
you can refer to the first first of the
second question I answered where I
thought of the day that I deeply
disagree with this that in a democratic
society freedom of speech should not be
based on the ability to pay but in
answer to this question that is the
answer now you've heard me say on
YouTube I had this experience with the
Green Party in Canada I could also talk
about my experience of Buddhism both of
those examples what really mattered was
motivating elderly people to support you
so if you have highly motivated retired
people
older than 65 who are giving you $100 a
month so there could be elderly Chinese
people who give money to a Buddhist
temple could be elderly white people who
give money to the Green Party whatever
that forms the economic basis for a
successful political movement that is
the brutal ugly truth nobody else is
gonna tell you Mike yes you know the
foundation for a successful political
movement is financial and the foundation
for those finances in my opinion is
transparency and accountability right
and transparency does not mean democracy
so like those Chinese people when they
donate their money to the Buddhist
temple they may have no control over
what happens to that money they don't
get to vote they don't get a referendum
they don't get they don't even get a
debate or discussion but what they will
get if it's a good Buddhist temple is a
report telling them what happened to the
money and then of course they can decide
in the next year if they want to donate
again or not they might cancel their
donation so you know okay so much money
went into repainting the roof so much
money did this so much money did that
and you know it may be a course that
some of the money is being spent to take
care of orphans to give food to starving
people actually some Buddhist temples do
animal rights stuff also to liberate
animals from cages and this kind of
thing that's that's another story there
could be a one-hour discussion right
there but you know you you add it all up
and you give them a list and even in the
complete absence of democracy that can
be a very powerful and meaningful thing
that's the complete answer to your
question for the purpose of this podcast
Mike obviously I could speak about it
even greater length yeah the foundation
is financial and economic the foundation
for that has to do with trust with
credibility with legitimacy and the
foundation for that in turn is
transparency and accountability
that's the essence of the thing and the
most successful movements are the most
invisible it's not the case that the
squeaky wheel gets the grease it's a
misconception I've got a question coming
in from two of my longtime viewers here
Ava and Haruki they asked Haruki and I
were wondering what would be your
favorite or most memorable books you
read so far both fiction and nonfiction
and for what reasons so I'll give a
two-part answer one on fiction and one
on nonfiction I have read incredibly
little fiction in my adult life
incredibly little the only I mean the
most of the fiction I have read as an
adult has been for historical reasons so
like I mean you know when I'm reading
Buddhist philosophy I don't consider
that fiction in a sense some of it is
fiction you know if you're reading but
if you're studying ancient Buddhist
philosophy that to me is not what we
normally consider fiction it's not like
reading a novel that's really study or
research would have you something I may
return to to reading here you really
need to have a certain kind of mentality
for that the original novels for the
water merchants and that's a very
strange title the water margin is a very
strange reflection on the history of of
China
that's a fictional work but again I'm
reading it for nonfiction reasons and
it's much misunderstood it's been made
into many many kung-fu movies and it's
often presented as a sort of Robin Hood
style adventure of heroes but really the
book is very political it's published in
four volumes in English translation by
Sidney Shapiro in the future there will
be better translations it's not it's not
a great English translation but it's
okay but I mean politically there are
many many reflections on how the court
system worked on justice and injustice
on how the political system worked and I
mean it manages to be somewhat
entertaining but the tone of
condemnation is consistent throughout
and one of the strangest things when
that book is adapted into a modern movie
or modern cartoon because it has
many times they turn almost all of the
the villains into heroes but really that
book is presenting most of the the major
characters as villains and that gets a
it's a bizarre or cultural
transformation that tends to just get
overlooked whether they're sort of made
into fun-loving good guys but in the
original book it's that the crimes they
commit are taken very seriously and look
and I just gave you one example from
that story there's a there's a guy who's
guilty of murder and through complete
financial corruption he really escapes
punishment and rather than being in
prison you know it's so corrupt that
he's paid bribes to the prison wardens
so he's allowed while other people in
the prison are being tortured and other
people in the prison are having to work
on a farm in a sort of slavery situation
he's allowed to stroll out of the prison
go down the road sit in a restaurant
overlooking the river and get drunk and
eat food at this restaurant and in the
story he doesn't appreciate this at all
he doesn't feel privileged he does it
depicts him as being completely
self-righteous haughty contemptuous and
totally self pitying totally preoccupied
with how difficult his life is even
though the book has just described to
you him walking past people who are
being tortured who are being whipped and
working in the field or everything and
the reader is really told this guy is
guilty of murder and there's no
justification for it's not you know it's
not a good it's not a morally gray area
that murder you know he's a bad guy this
is this is sort of confronting the
audience in its own time as a very very
biting satire but you know somehow
people read that and they see these
these characters as heroes or they they
manage to miss the point but really
that's a very dark cross-section of
Chinese society pre-modern Chinese
society the only book of contemporary
fiction that I have read in 15 years is
the the series Game of Thrones
Oh the series is called A Song of Ice
and Fire by Georgia or Martin the TV
show Game of Thrones is now very famous
and again what what I'm interested in
those books are really the reflections
on on political philosophy they also
have some political content in them but
in terms of fiction really for like 15
years that's that's it that's the only
thing I've read it's interesting we
never fight with in Game of Thrones I I
really can't relate to the stuff that's
about childhood that's about you know
from the perspective of the very young
characters I'm not interested in the
kind of teenage romance elements that
are there because some of the storylines
have romance with young people but a lot
of the scenes where it's kind of mean
old men sitting around a table talking
about war in politics there's a lot that
I do relate to and some of the lines
that are very simple very throwaway of
have really stayed with me there's one
scene where a child is questioning a
much older man about a battle that's
just happened you know he's saying you
know why did you fight these people why
did you kill these people and the answer
that comes from the older man this is to
a child a real child
he just says they were foes you know the
reason why that has an impact on me as a
reader is that those novels they really
do take the time to talk about the
complex morally murky political
situation that surrounds those types of
episodes but then in the core of that
you have these you know terrible
simplicity's you know what's the answer
to that question why why did you guys
just have to fight to the death with
swords and it's not being glorified it's
not being presented as something fun or
adventuresome or citing it's presented
as this brutal you know feudal dystopia
but at the end of the day what can you
say to a child they were foes you know
so there are there are reflections of
that kind in that series that's I do
value and the do stay with me so then in
the nonfiction category I'll just give a
brief shout out to lucidity 'he's so
among the ancient greeks lucidity 'he's
a very moving and jarring critique of
democracy that at the same time
describes for you how democracy works in
ancient Athens there is an edited
version of Thucydides great work
his main Opeth that is under the title
on justice power and human nature so
that's the title given to a compressed
version a set of excerpts from
Thucydides in English so it's a much
shorter book but if you can't spell
Thucydides and you just want to google
that so Google ancient Greece on justice
power and human nature and you should
find the version of the book I'm
alluding to I can't say through Citadis
is a book that changed my life because I
read it relatively late in life but it's
it's a book I deeply appreciate and I
have commented on on my youtube channel
before ok next question
Scarlett gone raw asks ok so now we're
getting into more autobiographical stuff
here why the enormous sacrifice to teach
in China she asks I understand your
passion as an Asian Studies and politics
but to be so separated from personal
freedoms liberties and sorry to mention
your ongoing precarious situation with
your wife involving your daughter I
can't help but speculate that it's not
the right timing for this intellectual
opportunity um
so pause there the question actually
goes on uh well the timing is peculiar
and it's forced by a number of factors
my lawyer tells me I've got something
like 18 months before there's any
progress with the divorce
it seems to me possible that something
will happen about 10 months from now at
the soonest something but the French
legal system in case you haven't heard
is not quick so my whole situation with
my wife and daughter so far as I know
based on the information I have
including most of all the information
from my lawyer is is that it's in
suspended animation is that nothing is
going to change for one for one year my
situation at the University here in
Canada is another reason well I have to
do this now and not later my situation
with my career and needing to earn a
living is yet another reason
there there are several different
factors forcing it to be now and not
later but if I stayed here in Canada I
would actually be in a worse
circumstance for seeing my daughter not
better so I know that sounds strange but
it's true now among the things I did
you've recently seen the video where I
reflect on the horrible ways in which my
my wife really has harmed me despite
that as soon as I had the plan in place
to move to Kunming China I wrote to my
wife and invited her to come and visit
me there you know she could bring my
daughter or she could leave my daughter
behind so my ex-wife for her you nan you
nan is the province in China and could
Ming is the city that's really the
center of the world for my ex-wife her
research her area of expertise that's
that's really the core of her own area
of interest and that's where we met we
met Yunnan and we lived there together
what eight years ago or something now a
long time ago and it's a very meaningful
opportunity for her to come and spend
time and in connect so I knew there
would be a good chance that she and my
daughter would actually come to join me
there temporarily or or you know
possibly for a few months or what have
you it also said could Ming it isn't any
closer or further away from from France
than Canada is I'm on the west coast of
Canada is an amazing distance from
France if you're on the east coast of
Canada it might not be that bad but
moving from here to convey in these
circumstances does not put me at any
disadvantage so my wife actually is
prevaricate and that I knew that would
actually be a very tempting opportunity
for her to come to China once I was
already set up in China and at first she
said no and then later she wrote to me
saying yes that she would come to visit
me and she would bring my daughter to
come in so we don't know if that's
really gonna happen if you guys have
watched that recent video you'll know
she um she has a tendency to try to
blackmail me or backstab me and it's
possible that just to hurt me she would
come to visit that part of China and
still not allow me to see my daughter
that you know that we'd be in the same
city together
and I would not be able to see without
that's that's already what she did to me
once in Europe so there's no limit as it
Michels it's possible she'll literally
murder me I mean I wouldn't you know you
know as possible you know there's no
limit to this and I've I've sort of
wondered why given that she's already
done these terrible things given that
you would lie to a court that you'd lie
to the cops what won't you do you know
and there are many other way she's
harming that I haven't mentioned anyway
yeah so it's a strange it's a strange
set of circumstances I would just point
out you just started by saying why the
enormous sacrifice to go to China
what's the sacrifice I hope something
causative comes out of it just a few
months ago I applied to join the
Canadian Army which would also be a huge
sacrifice just a few months ago I
formally spoke to the Israeli embassy
people about migrated Israel which will
also be a huge sacrifice so I've been
looking at a whole lot of huge
sacrifices most of which offer nothing
positive in my life nothing positive for
me or my daughter something positive
could come out of this move to China so
we gotta hope for the best
so the question goes honest just say
wouldn't it be better if you postpone
this trip to China no I've got a I've
got to get this done I've got to finish
my education I've got to get a real job
I've got to get a real home precisely so
that everything's in order so that I
hope I can be a good father to my
daughter whenever the the divorce
actually wraps up in court and we don't
know it's certainly possible I'll be in
a situation where I see my daughter say
three months a year that happens with
divorces you know it's possible I'll be
in a situation where I see her every
other weekend and we live in the same
city we don't know but I'm gonna be in
some position of larger responsibility
for my daughter in the in the next
several years I mean at the absolute one
I don't see how the French courts could
take more than two years but yeah it
could be it could be still 18 months so
which is I said all right next question
is from Julia Jansen a question about
your divorce videos I'm sorry if I got
anything wrong but to me it sounds like
from the time you and your ex-wife
together you were suffering and for you
the relationship was bad
she said she sorry you said she always
promised a change do you think things
would get better but did you really
marry a woman based on the promise that
everything would get better you seem so
rational and yet this decision sounds to
me a bit naive I'm just curious what
were your motives in the beginning
relationship so I'll start by saying in
written answer this question more
generally I'm not offended by these
questions it does not make me feel bad
that people care that people want to
know about these aspects and personally
that's very positive from my perspective
somehow below this this audio file I'll
provide the links to the account I wrote
I have a written account of what
happened with my divorce that's hidden
on my blog as it's hidden because it's
not that not that easy to find if you
google enough you could find it
eventually
um for anyone who wants to know I
appreciate that you want to know
that's it I'm it to me it's it's
completely positive and I know exactly
how it feels by contrast to be in the
situation where nobody cares and nobody
wants to know so from my perspective you
guys could know as much you want to you
already heard me say in my recent
youtube video sort of disclaimer or
warning that I I do avoid saying
anything critical about my ex-wife I do
avoid basically saying the bad things
she did so it is very flattering to my
ex-wife my mode of approaching this
personal history but as you know also I
think that's for the best
but beyond that I'm you know I'm happy
to have the question I'm happy for you
guys to read as much as you want to read
or hear as much as you want to hear
about it and for some people it's deeply
meaningful there are some people for
whatever reason this resonates at them
and it really matters them a lot but for
other people they just pay attention to
it because they care about me they're
interested in who I am in my life and of
course I've al you that even more it's
that's wonderful so the specific
question here you know if you're asking
would you really marry a woman based on
the promise that things would get better
yes yeah
and of course that's partly because my
ex-wife has other redeeming qualities my
ex-wife is very smart and very
hardworking those are things I value a
lot and when we first got together she
was very much in love with me she was in
love with me right to the end too and I
just say even with the day at the
airport when we split up the last thing
she ever said to me was I still love you
she hasn't said that for a while now
since then no but I mean you know my my
ex-wife had a set of very obvious
positive qualities that in my mind
justified giving her a chance again and
again do the right thing now this both
is part of the beginning relationship
and the end relationship what I said at
the very start of this long Q&A session
about the value I placed in democracy
this actually does have a real role in
my relations with women and with my
personal life to me it is inconceivable
that I would be in a relationship with a
woman where I make all the decisions or
I take responsibility for things I do
approach all my personal relationships
in a very sort of democratic way which
doesn't mean I take no responsibility
doesn't mean you vote on everything but
on any given issue you discuss okay is
this your decision or is this my
decision what do you think what do I
think
who's who's gonna make the call who's
gonna do the work who's gonna be
responsible for what happens next
or I really I don't just assume the
woman in my life is involved in making
those decisions I really demanded a
demand that has equals were really
involved in thinking about it and
deciding things as they happen now so at
the beginning of that obviously this is
part of why I valued her as a person she
was smart enough she was you know
engaged with related issues in terms of
her own research and scholarship this
obviously for me was the you know
enticing prospect of being in a
relationship with someone who was my
intellectual equal
however as I say this actually also
foretells the end of the relationship of
why the marriage
couldn't work anymore like the the
marriage could have continued if I had
just become a tyrant if I just said look
you know you've destroyed your
credibility you don't get to make any
decisions anymore from now on I'm the
man in the relationship and I decide
things if I had taken that approach the
marriage could have lasted but from my
perspective it wouldn't really be a
marriage anymore it would really be you
know it would be a very unequal it would
be some kind of 24-hour BDSM
relationship or something it would to me
this would not really be conceivable so
that's both the beginning in the end I
both expect and I demand to be in
relationships with people whom I can
treat as my equals who I can debate
things with as my equals where I can
share the decision-making
responsibilities with the other people
person or people as my equals and where
their opinion matters and so on where
it's not just me making decisions but by
the same token when you're in a marriage
like that and it falls apart then you
get to the point where it's like well
you know you've you've harmed me you've
done these terrible things to me you
haven't apologized you haven't said it's
gonna be back in the future there's no
way to make this work and I can't just I
can't relate to you like my slave I
either have to treat you you know like
my equal or we have to split up we have
to be separate but equal you know yeah
maybe that's enough of a set of
reflections in response to that question
all right Mar Mar ask the question I'd
like to hear how your life aligns with
atheism what does it mean to you you've
mentioned in one of your videos that you
consider yourself to be a nihilistic
atheist can you go into more detail
about that best of luck to you with your
move and new chapter in your life you've
been through a lot in this experience we
deem as life but you keep on keeping on
um you presume you presume that I keep
on keeping on do you hmm
um look so atheism and nihilism are sort
of two different things when I speak to
people face-to-face it's easy for me to
talk about nihilism because I know who
they
our I know what aspects they're gonna
relate to or what this is gonna mean to
them it's harder for me to talk about in
a sort of generalized broadcast I like
to use the term historical nihilism
historical nihilism is a term used by
the Communist Party of China to describe
the antithesis to their ruling ideology
historical nihilism is an attitude where
we learn from the lessons of history but
we deny the idea that history is an
intrinsically evolutionary process we
deny the idea that everything is getting
better and better we deny the idea that
everything is is necessary that so for
example the Chinese Communist Party they
will justify the deaths of millions of
people when people were massacred under
Mao Zedong by saying well this was
historically necessary this was part of
a positive evolutionary process etc etc
so historical nihilism to begin with is
the idea that no we study history but we
admit to ourselves that many of the
things in history are meaningless that
many of the massacres and disasters did
not contribute to progress that they
were they were just disasters pure and
simple now this of course does not mean
that history lacks in lacks in meaning
or lacks in lessons for us to learn I
think on the contrary this opens the
door to us really profoundly learning
from history but it is it is closing the
door on an ideological or religious
reading of history nihilism has had
several other historical moments that
also color the meaning of the term for
me the Russian nihilists had this catch
phrase go to the poor be the poor and
denialists in Russia were in general a
non-communist attempt to address the
corruption and decadence of Russian
society and to lay their hands on the
problem of poverty and you know the
social dysfunction of pre-revolutionary
Russia so it's another moment in history
it doesn't mean the nihilist said all
the answers in life oh I guess I could
have mentioned this under the the
the question about novels there's a
famous novel by Turgenev the Russian
author turgenyev called fathers and sons
fathers and sons is probably the single
most famous depiction of Russian
nihilism as a philosophy although of
course it's partly a ericka chur of or a
critique of Russian nihilism but I don't
I don't specifically identify with
Russian nihilism but it's another
interesting moment in history when
nihilism came to the fore as a as a
concept in terms of what is the core of
nihilism it is similar to ancient
skepticism not skepticism the way the
word is used today but skepticism in the
ancient Greek sense that sadly nobody
seems to read or be aware of it is two
different things if I say to you there
is no god that is not really the same
thing as saying to you there is nothing
to be believed in apart from a rejection
of belief in a specific ideology there
is a critique of belief itself that is
the core of nihilism next question
Linda Carlson I work for a company that
extracts minerals from the ground the
mineral is essential for human welfare
but the mining process is not
environmentally friendly what is your
opinion having gone environmentally
friendly jobs or non-vegan jobs okay
this is the last question today's
section and I mean it's it's a simple
one look I this year just a couple
months ago I volunteered to join the
army I volunteered to become a
professional killer for the Canadian
Armed Forces you better believe it
that's not hypothetical my signature is
on the paper I did the paperwork I went
in and wrote the tests I I went through
the process so you know I mean we all
got to do something to survive I talked
about on YouTube it was possible I would
have gotten a job at Starbucks this year
or what have you that
happen on the other hand I have a
storied career of quitting jobs for
ethical reasons so I'll try to tell this
anecdote really briefly but when I was
in Cambodia I had a job that on paper
looked like the most morally positive
job but basically because of corruption
corruption and incompetence on the part
of my boss it was really quite immoral
you know you're doing health care
research healthcare research can save
lives if it's corrupt it can kill people
or at a minimum it's failing to save
those lives it's squandering the
opportunity to make that positive
difference to save those lives through
corruption through incompetence or what
have you so it did really damage me to
quit that job when I did in Cambodia I
did not have any easy alternative to it
but that was the right thing to do
morally at that time and I tried to
reform the way that company operated for
the inside and I tried to express the
problems etc but at you know if you're
in fury errs are corrupt or incompetence
you can change things easily when your
superiors are corrupt our incompetence
then you got to quit now if I had joined
the army who knows what kind of
corruption and competence I would have
encountered but this is the real world
coming back to the point I made before
in response to the question from Mike
you know Mike asked about what's what's
the most effective and I talked about
economic aspects of activism ultimately
all morality is a luxury and you know it
went when you do not have you know a
better option I mean veganism at its
core is about doing what's possible and
practical and if you are too poor if you
do not have the luxury to quit your job
if you do not have the luxury to even
search for a new job to replace it if
you don't have a substitute if you don't
have an alternative
you know Lock and Load hey man you know
somebody's got to wake up in the morning
and drop those bombs on the Islamic
state and I'm someone who comes out of a
background of studying some of the worst
disasters in American foreign policy you
know American foreign policy in Cambodia
in Laos in Haiti something else a [ __ ]
the air like you know I mean I have
studied some of the worst examples of
American military intervention and
America has made some of the same
mistakes again and again but
nevertheless when I had the opportunity
or the seeming opportunity to sign up
and be part of the next disaster I
signed up for it and you know I'm not a
pacifist
I believe in minimizing harm minimizing
the harm caused by war minimizing the
harm caused by different forms of
economic activity but the minimum is
certainly much more than zero
and it's interesting I've lived through
a number of sort of in my lifetime there
have been a number of failed peace
protests I remember marching in the
anti-war protest in Toronto that I
believe still are the largest protest in
history of Canada when people were
protesting against starting the war in
Iraq or you know what what am I going to
tell you today there is no peace
protests for for Isis for the Islamic
state
there were many conflicts that kind of
the world where there is a broad
consensus that resorting to the
brutality of force is necessary and
where it's proceeding you know mineral
extraction Canada's is built on it and
there are very peculiar forms of
violence that are built into resource
extraction what I feel is the real
alternative for vegans to take seriously
and it's become very marginalized being
is I've tried again again to talk about
a habitat conservation centred approach
to veganism I think it's very misleading
and counterproductive
to demonize for example a specific crop
the way that some vegans demonize palm
oil well palm oil if you stop farming
palm oil it doesn't help the endangered
species doesn't help the animals that
would live in that forest the only thing
that will help them is habitat
conservation is when you draw a line in
the map and you don't say we can't draw
we can't farm palm oil here you have to
farm some other palm you know date palms
you know anything like that it's still
gonna any crop is still gonna destroy
the habitat the one thing that will help
the orangutans that will help the wild
animals in question the only thing that
will make the difference is habitat
conservation is where you draw a bunch
of lines in the map and say inside these
lines we have no human exploitation of
nature whatsoever we have real jungle we
have real wilderness and inside those
lines that's where the orangutans and
the monkeys and the Tigers and the
elephants get to live and that
ultimately is also what I have to say
about mineral extraction you can't turn
the whole world into Disneyland there's
got to be a line of the map and on one
side of the line we have all the
brutality of mining and mineral
extraction and the other side we have
land that's being preserved not to
benefit humans not even for the sake of
climate change or something but that is
there for the animals for the forests
for the wilderness to exist as a true
and in itself thanks for your time guys
thanks for writing in with these
questions I'm happy to hear them I'm
happy to answer them I really do value
the quality and caliber of the questions
that received anyone can pay that $1 and
comment and get my attention but the one
dollar alone seems to be enough to
really prevent trolls from signing up
durianrider says he's rich durianrider
has not paid the one dollar to come
online upon me he's welcome to do it so
it's amazing how much higher the
intellectual caliber is simply by having
that one dollar as a barrier to entry in
contrast to the quality of comments you
get
on YouTube or on blogs or other sorts of
websites thank you guys all very much
thank you